Java Tutorial
Java Training
Our core Java programming tutorial is designed for students and working professionals. Java is an object-oriented, class-based, concurrent, secured and general-purpose computer-programming language. It is a widely used robust technology.

What is Java?
Java is a programming language and a platform. Java is a high level, robust, object-oriented and secure programming language.

Java was developed by Sun Microsystems (which is now the subsidiary of Oracle) in the year 1995. James Gosling is known as the father of Java. Before Java, its name was Oak. Since Oak was already a registered company, so James Gosling and his team changed the name from Oak to Java.

Platform: Any hardware or software environment in which a program runs, is known as a platform. Since Java has a runtime environment (JRE) and API, it is called a platform.

Java Example
Let's have a quick look at Java programming example. A detailed description of Hello Java example is available in next page.

Simple.java

class Simple{  
    public static void main(String args[]){  
     System.out.println("Hello Java");  
    }  
}  
Test it Now
Application
According to Sun, 3 billion devices run Java. There are many devices where Java is currently used. Some of them are as follows:

Desktop Applications such as acrobat reader, media player, antivirus, etc.
Web Applications such as irctc.co.in, javatpoint.com, etc.
Enterprise Applications such as banking applications.
Mobile
Embedded System
Smart Card
Robotics
Games, etc.
Types of Java Applications
There are mainly 4 types of applications that can be created using Java programming:

1) Standalone Application
Standalone applications are also known as desktop applications or window-based applications. These are traditional software that we need to install on every machine. Examples of standalone application are Media player, antivirus, etc. AWT and Swing are used in Java for creating standalone applications.

2) Web Application
An application that runs on the server side and creates a dynamic page is called a web application. Currently, Servlet, JSP, Struts, Spring, Hibernate, JSF, etc. technologies are used for creating web applications in Java.

3) Enterprise Application
An application that is distributed in nature, such as banking applications, etc. is called an enterprise application. It has advantages like high-level security, load balancing, and clustering. In Java, EJB is used for creating enterprise applications.

4) Mobile Application
An application which is created for mobile devices is called a mobile application. Currently, Android and Java ME are used for creating mobile applications.

Java Platforms / Editions
There are 4 platforms or editions of Java:

1) Java SE (Java Standard Edition)
It is a Java programming platform. It includes Java programming APIs such as java.lang, java.io, java.net, java.util, java.sql, java.math etc. It includes core topics like OOPs, String, Regex, Exception, Inner classes, Multithreading, I/O Stream, Networking, AWT, Swing, Reflection, Collection, etc.

2) Java EE (Java Enterprise Edition)
It is an enterprise platform that is mainly used to develop web and enterprise applications. It is built on top of the Java SE platform. It includes topics like Servlet, JSP, Web Services, EJB, JPA, etc.

3) Java ME (Java Micro Edition)
It is a micro platform that is dedicated to mobile applications.

4) JavaFX
It is used to develop rich internet applications. It uses a lightweight user interface API.

Prerequisite
To learn Java, you must have the basic knowledge of C/C++ programming language.

Audience
Our Java programming tutorial is designed to help beginners and professionals.

Problem
We assure that you will not find any problem in this Java tutorial. However, if there is any mistake, please post the problem in the contact form.



Do You Know?
What is the difference between JRE and JVM?
What is the purpose of JIT compiler?
Can we save the java source file without any name?
Why java uses the concept of Unicode system?
What will we learn in Basics of Java?
History of Java
Features of Java
Hello Java Program
Program Internal
How to set path?
Difference between JDK,JRE and JVM
Internal Details of JVM
Variable and Data Type
Unicode System
Operators
Next TopicHistory of Java


Next →

Youtube For Videos Join Our Youtube Channel: Join Now
Feedback
Send your Feedback to feedback@javatpoint.com
Help Others, Please Share
facebook twitter pinterest

Learn Latest Tutorials
Splunk tutorial
Splunk

SPSS tutorial
SPSS

Swagger tutorial
Swagger

T-SQL tutorial
Transact-SQL

Tumblr tutorial
Tumblr

React tutorial
ReactJS

Regex tutorial
Regex

Reinforcement learning tutorial
Reinforcement Learning

R Programming tutorial
R Programming

RxJS tutorial
RxJS

React Native tutorial
React Native

Python Design Patterns
Python Design Patterns

Python Pillow tutorial
Python Pillow

Python Turtle tutorial
Python Turtle

Keras tutorial
Keras


Preparation
Aptitude
Aptitude

Logical Reasoning
Reasoning

Verbal Ability
Verbal Ability

Interview Questions
Interview Questions

Company Interview Questions
Company Questions


Trending Technologies
Artificial Intelligence
Artificial Intelligence

AWS Tutorial
AWS

Selenium tutorial
Selenium

Cloud Computing
Cloud Computing

Hadoop tutorial
Hadoop

ReactJS Tutorial
ReactJS

Data Science Tutorial
Data Science

Angular 7 Tutorial
Angular 7

Blockchain Tutorial
Blockchain

Git Tutorial
Git

Machine Learning Tutorial
Machine Learning

DevOps Tutorial
DevOps


B.Tech / MCA
DBMS tutorial
DBMS

Data Structures tutorial
Data Structures

DAA tutorial
DAA

Operating System
Operating System

Computer Network tutorial
Computer Network

Compiler Design tutorial
Compiler Design

Computer Organization and Architecture
Computer Organization

Discrete Mathematics Tutorial
Discrete Mathematics

Ethical Hacking
Ethical Hacking

Computer Graphics Tutorial
Computer Graphics

Software Engineering 
Software Engineering

html tutorial
Web Technology

Cyber Security tutorial
Cyber Security

Automata Tutorial
Automata

C Language tutorial
C Programming

C++ tutorial
C++

Java tutorial
Java

.Net Framework tutorial
.Net

Python tutorial
Python

List of Programs
Programs

Control Systems tutorial
Control System

Data Mining Tutorial
Data Mining

Data Warehouse Tutorial
Data Warehouse






Javatpoint Services